\tableofcontents

## Introduction

A number of extensions to the standard Black-Scholes option pricing
model have been proposed to account for observed structure in implied
volatility surfaces.  Denoting $\Sigma(K, T)$ for the Black-Scholes
implied volatility of an option with strike $K$ and expiry $T$ we 
observe the following:

1. Implied volatility $\Sigma$ varies across both strike $K$ and expiry $T$ ie 
$\Sigma=\Sigma(K,T)$.
2. Implied volatility $\Sigma(K,T)$ evolves over time ie $\Sigma(K,T)=\Sigma_t (K,T)$.

We have what might be considered *two* classes of solutions to these
problems - extensions to Black-Scholes which introduce additional sources of
randomness to the underlying dynamics and those which do not.  

## Local Volatility 

The *local volatility* (LV) model allows the underlying volatility
to be a deterministic function of $S_t$ and $t$ 
\eq{dS/S = r dt + \sigma(S,t) dB.}
where $\sigma(S,t)$ is often referred to as the *local volatility
function*.  Since $\sigma(S,t)$ is a deterministic function there is 
no additional randomness.  The model may be a parametric model like one of the 
Gatheral functions, or a non-parametric model like one used in many papers.
We may not even be interested in the functional form of $\sigma(S,t)$ - instead
we might only focus on computing $\sigma_{ij}=\sigma(S=K_i,T=T_j)$ at specific
discrete points in $(S, T)$ space.  This grid of local volatilities might be used 
later in a pricing tree or finite difference grid.  There are numerous ways to
compute $\sigma(S,t)$, and these volatilies are able to account for 
observed structure in implied volatility across $K$ and $T$.

In practice LV model re-calibrations are required periodically.  This 
suggests that while LV models can account for differences in $\Sigma$ across
$K$ and $T$ they cannot account for changes in $\Sigma$ over time.  This
means it cannot be that underlying volatility is a deterministic function
of underlying and time only.

## Stochastic Volatility 

We consider a second class of model where the underlying volatility is
itself a stochastic process (for now we limit ourselves to diffusive
processes only).  These stochastic volatility (SV) models use a process of 
the form
\eq{ dS/S = rdt + \phi(v) dB }
where $\phi(v)$ is another diffusion process which may be correlated with
the underlying.  These models are popular because they are able to reproduce
observed features in implied volatility surfaces, account for changing 
implied volatility surfaces over time, and sometimes permit (essentially) 
closed form solutions for rapid pricing, calibration, and hedging.

## Stochastic Local Volatility

Stochastic Local Volatility (SLV) combine LV and SV approaches to consider
models of the form
\eq{ dS/S = rdt + \sigma(S,t) \phi(v) dB}
where again $\phi(v)$ is another diffusion process that may be correlated.  
Here $\sigma(S,t)$ is the LV component of the model and $\phi(v)$ the SV 
component.  Englemann Et Al (2012) gives an interesting description about 
the shortcomings of both LV and SV models.  The process of computing 
$\sigma(S,t)$, making inference about the SV model, and pricing options 
in general SLV models appears to be relatively recent (a first attempt I 
can find is Ren, Madan \& Qian (2007)) and the literature relatively sparse.

## Inference in LV, SV and SLV Models

Here are some basic points about inference in LV, SV and SLV models.   This
is not at all exhaustive, and I have not done a thorough literature search.

* The literature on fitting LV/SV models to market prices is extensive.  Even
my basic searching (I don't have journal access) on SV and LV models is pretty
overwhelming - it's hard to even know where to start.  Even a cursory look suggests a
huge amount of literature on filtering in SV models.  This includes tracking the
latent underlying volatility, online parameter estimation, and both.  These appear to mostly like:
    1. Specify a model for the underlying, and one for the volatility (eg Heston).
    The volatility is the latent driver process and the underlying price the observation.
    2. Use various techniques to build filters for this problem.
    3. Add complications, like more stochastic factors, jumps etc

  But the literature using vol surfaces in filters looks less common.  Presumably 
  we get much more vol information from the vol surface and the filters will be more
  effective.
* I do not see your point re the implied volatility surface changing over time
as being evidence of a contradiction in the pure LV model being made else where.
* There exists literature on SLV models, but it is sparse and recent enough
that I feel less overwhelmed searching it.

## Maybe a niche?

Parameter estimation and latent variable estimation in stochastic volatility
models seems exhaustive.  There are a huge number of different models investigated,
and techniques explored, both frequentist and Bayesian.  If we focus attention
on option pricing models (ie set aside straight econometric models)






